# COURSE DESCRIPTION

Incomes are stagnant in many parts of the world, and the gap between the rich and poor has never been greater. Every year, millions of children die before their fifth birthday, mostly from preventable causes. Many more are infected with HIV, tuberculosis, or malaria, and 1 out of every 10 people on the planet live in extreme poverty. How is this still the case when, over the past few decades, the rich world has transferred approximately 2 trillion in aid to developing countries? Has it all been a waste? Money thrown down "Third word rat-holes"? Or has this money been woefully inadequate? Are there any reasons for optimism? Students will examine these and other questions by reading and discussing a selection of popular titles in global health and development. Critically, we will consider the role of the international community—and each of us as world citizens—in contributing to progress.

We will begin the semester by reading two books on the experience of living in poverty, both here in the US and elsewhere in the world. In the first, "$2.00 a Day", sociologist Kathryn Edin and poverty researcher Luke Shaefer examine the lives of nearly 3 million kids in the US growing up in homes that have almost no cash income. In the second, "Portfolios of the Poor", economist Jonathan Morduch and a team of economists and microfinance experts broaden the investigation to Bangladesh, India, and South Africa. Both books will help us to understand how a billion people get by every day with so little.

Next, we will turn to two books that will give us an opportunity to consider why some people and places are poor and sick in the first place. In "Why Nations Fail", economists Daren Acemoglu and James Robinson make the case that political and economic institutions—not culture, weather, and geography—explain why some nations are healthy and wealthy and others are poor and sick. In "Tinderbox", journalist Craig Timberg and AIDS researcher Daniel Halperin look at the AIDS epidemic through a social determinants lens and show us how disease is more than just biology and medicine.

Just before Fall Break, we will enter a lively debate about the role of foreign aid in bringing about "The End of Poverty". Economist Jeff Sachs gives us an inspiring look at how we could end extreme poverty by 2025 with enough resources. Could it work? In 2006, Sachs launched the Millennium Villages Project to convince the world. Did it work? Journalist Nina Munk takes us on a critical journey to MVP sites in her book "The Idealist". Between these two bookends we will screen "Good Fortune", a documentary about the recipients of foreign aid in Kenya and the flipside of good intentions.

We'll also read "Poor Economics" by Esther Duflo and Abhijit Banerjee, two of the founders of the Abdul Latif Jameel Poverty Action Lab. This book will take us on a fascenating tour of evidence from recent randomized controlled trials that will reveal keen insights into the the lives of the poor and suggest steps for turning evidence into action.

In the run up to Thanksgiving, we'll turn to a discussion of how each of us can make a difference through our lives and careers. In "Mountains Beyond Mountains", Tracy Kidder introduces us to Duke alum Dr. Paul Farmer and the inspiring story of Partners in Health. Next we'll read about a different type of public health hero, epidemiologist Bill Foege, and his account of how the world eradicated smallpox. After Foege's book "House on Fire", we'll read "A Path Appears" by journalists Nicholas Kristof and Sheryl WuDunn, a book that will hopefully inspire each one of us to be effective global citizens. Just before the break we'll screen our second film, "Living in Emergency", a documentary about the challenging work of Doctors Without Borders.

We will wrap up the semester with Charles Kenny's "Getting Better". We'll ask ourselves whether all of the news is really doom and gloom and consider again the role of the international community in fostering progress.

